---
layout: post
title: Signal - The State of JavaScript II
description: As I continue to grow this little blog into a meaningful resource for aspiring JavaScript developers and like minded folks from the industry I'll be posting a signal consisting of just JavaScript news once a week.
wordcount: 453
manualdate: January 03, 2015
---

As I continue to grow this little blog into a meaningful resource for aspiring JavaScript developers and like minded folks from the industry I'll be posting a signal consisting of just JavaScript news once a week. This is a fun project for me and within time I hope that it will become a resource that could be of some benefit to others.

[Angular JS 2.0 Review](http://ng-learn.org/2014/03/AngularJS-2-Status-Preview/)

We do know about the partnership with Google and Microsoft that built Angular 2 on TypeScript. You can still develop for Angular 2 in ES5, ES6 and now TypeScript:

> AngularJS team has been busy working on AngularJS 2.0. As we mentioned before, this is not a complex major update; this is a whole rewrite! Having learnt many lessons from AngularJS and AngularDart a lot of thinking is being done to produce the future core and its ecosystem. We will walk you through what you need to know to stay up to date

Some can't grok the ubsurdity in all this as it's clearly stated that this is not a major update but a complete rewrite. 

[Welcome jQuery Developers to NPM](http://blog.npmjs.org/post/111475741445/publishing-your-jquery-plugin-to-npm-the-quick)

The jQuery plugin registry now recommends plugin publishers switch to nop to publish their plugins.

> If you missed it, the jQuery plugin registry now only provides read access to plugins and recommends plugin publishers switch to npm to publish their plugins. If you’re here, I’m guessing you’re one of the plugin publishers making the switch. We want to make it as painless as possible.

[Maybe You Should Stop Using Grunt?](https://medium.com/@nickheiner/maybe-you-should-stop-using-grunt-40ac57fd6ad9)

There are numerous build tools out there, however when used and not maintained correctly it leaves a hell of alot of kruft and becomes hard to manage.

> If you are trying to build a reusable SDK to share across projects, I recommend against using Grunt. It may give you a few quick wins, but in the long term it will introduce enough systemic issues that you’ll spend more time hacking around it than you would setting up equivalent functionality from various other npm modules. A set of small, focused modules that you picked to address your needs turns out to be better than a monolith. Who knew?

There are other options like Jake, which has been around since Node was born.

