---
layout: post
title: Signal - The State of JavaScript III
description: Cute dogs come in a variety of shapes and sizes. Some cute dogs are cute for their adorable faces, others for their tiny stature, and even others for their massive size and some more crap and...
wordcount: 188
manualdate: 03/25/15'
---

[A Baseline for Front-End [JS] Developers: 2015](http://rmurphey.com/blog/2015/03/23/a-baseline-for-front-end-developers-2015/)

Rebecca Murphey's debut post [A Baseline for front-end developers](http://rmurphey.com/blog/2012/04/12/a-baseline-for-front-end-developers/) sparked alot of interest in the front end development community with her mentions of testing, node/npm and modularity. The trends have changed once again and so
three years later she publishes another inspiring post with the intricate details of the JavaScript world and how we value our tools and workflow much more than ever before.

> It’s been almost three years since I wrote A Baseline for Front-End Developers, probably my most popular post ever. Three years later, I still get Twitter mentions from people who are discovering it for the first time.
  
> In some ways, my words have aged well: there is, shockingly, nothing from that 2012 post that has me hanging my head in shame. Still, though: three years is a long time, and a whole lot has changed. In 2012 I encouraged people to learn browser dev tools and get on the module bandwagon; CSS pre-processors and client-side templating were still worthy of mention as new-ish things that people might not be sold on; and JSHint was a welcome relief from the #getoffmylawn admonitions – accurate though they may have been – of JSLint.

[HTML6 proposal for “single-page apps without JavaScript” causes uproar](http://jaxenter.com/html6-proposal-for-single-page-apps-without-javascript-causes-scandal-115919.html/)

The JavaScript and front-end community is in uproar over a proposal for HTML6 Single Page Apps without the use of JavaScript:

> A proposal for HTML6 has the front-end community in uproar over suggestions for single-page applications without (yes, without!) JavaScript. Take a few deep breaths, then read on.
 

[React Native is now open source](https://github.com/facebook/react-native)

> React Native enables you to build world-class application experiences on native platforms using a consistent developer experience based on JavaScript and React. The focus of React Native is on developer efficiency across all the platforms you care about - learn once, write anywhere. Facebook uses React Native in multiple production apps and will continue investing in React Native.

[JavaScript Standard Style — One Style to Rule Them All](https://github.com/feross/standard)

No decisions to make. No <code>.eslintrc,</code> <code>.jshintrc</code>, or <code>.jscsrc</code> files to manage. It just works.

> Adopting standard style means ranking the importance of community conventions higher than personal style, which does not make sense for 100% of projects and development cultures. At the same time, open source can be a hostile place for newbies. Setting up clear, automated contributor expectations makes a project healthier.

[Dart for the Entire Web](http://news.dartlang.org/2015/03/dart-for-entire-web.html)

> In order to do what's best for our users and the web, and not just Google Chrome, we will focus our web efforts on compiling Dart to JavaScript. We have decided not to integrate the Dart VM into Chrome. Our new web strategy puts us on a path to deliver the features our users need to be more productive building web apps with Dart. It also simplifies the testing and deployment scenarios for our developers, because they can focus on a single way to build, test, and deploy their Dart apps for the web.
